## Key Idea: Lincoln's disappointment with General Meade's failure to capture Lee ##

In this letter written by President Lincoln to General Meade in 1863, we see Lincoln expressing his bitter disappointment and frustration over the failure to capture General Lee. Lincoln felt that victory was within their grasp and believes that if Meade had acted, the war could have ended. 

The letter starts with Lincoln expressing his frustration, as he wonders why the army did not seize the opportunity to defeat the enemy. He reflects on how simple it would have been to overcome Lee and feels that any general could have achieved victory under the circumstances. Lincoln even goes as far as saying that if he had been there, he could have defeated Lee himself. 

It is important to note that during this period, Lincoln was known for being conservative and restrained in his language. So, this letter carries great significance, as it can be seen as a severe reprimand coming from him. Lincoln emphasizes in the letter that Meade does not seem to grasp the magnitude of the misfortune caused by Lee's escape. 

According to Lincoln, capturing Lee would have been a game-changing moment in the war. He believed that by closing in on him, it would have led to the end of the war, especially when considering the recent successes they had achieved. Lincoln felt that Meade's inaction had prolonged the war indefinitely. 

Lincoln questions Meade's ability to successfully attack Lee south of the river, highlighting the fact that they would only have a fraction of the force they had during the previous opportunity. He urges Meade not to waste any time attempting to do so, as it would be unreasonable to expect success with such limited resources. 

Overall, Lincoln's letter showcases his disappointment and frustration with General Meade's failure to capture Lee. He believed that it was a missed opportunity that could have led to the end of the war. Lincoln's words in this letter were severe, given his usual conservative language, highlighting the gravity of the situation in his eyes.